---
title: "A Study in Birthweight"
date: 2018-07-14
tags: [Data Analysis]
header:
  image: "/images/nightwindows.jpg"
excerpt: "Data Analysis, Data Science"
mathjax: "true"
siderbar:
  title: "Data Science Portfolio"
  nav: sidebar-sample
---
**Summary**
The goal is to study a causal relationship between the birth weights and the risk factors. We have found these statistically significant variables: mother’s weight, race, smoking status during the pregnancy, history of hypertension and presence of uterine irritability. Also, we found that mother’s age and smoking status have significant interaction effects. However, we found mother’s age, number of previous premature labours and number of physician visits during the first trimester has no statistically significant effects on birth weight.

**Introduction**
The birthweight dataset that we used in this study contains 189 observations that collected at Baystate Medical Center, Springfield, Mass during 1986. It has 9 variables, which are the following:
Age, indicates mother’s age in years.
Weight, abbreviated as lwt, is mother’s weight in pounds at last menstrual period.
Race, a categorical variable, which indicates mother’s race: 1 is White, 2 is black and 3 is other.
Smoke, also a categorical variable: 1 means mother smokes during pregnancy and 0 means mother does not smoke during pregnancy.
Premature labours, which abbreviated as ptl, indicates number of previous premature labours, with a minimum of 0 and maximum of  3.
Hypertension, abbreviated as ht, a binary variable that shows whether the mother has history of hypertension: 1 means yes and 0 means no.
Uterine Irritability, abbreviated as ui, a categorical variables that indicates whether the mother has uterine irritability: 1 means yes and 0 means no.
Physician visists, abbreviated as ftv, indicates number of physician visits during the first trimester, with a min of 0 and max of 6.
Birth weight, abbreviated as bwt, the response variable that we will use in the data analysis, indicates birth weight in grams.
Next, we define birth weight lower than 2500 grams as low and plot a bar plot showing the numbers of low weight and not low weight. The low variable is 31% of the whole data, and nor low variable is 69%. Because we want to see if the following variables influences birth weight, we use the low variable as a reference to help us do the analysis.
In the Smoking Status Bar Plot, the ratio of low to not low is approximately 1:1 in smokers (point to the left bar), but 1:4 in nonsmokers. Because of the difference in these ratio, we might conclude that smoking status influences birth weight.
In the Race Bar Plot, the ratio of low to not low is almost 1:3 in white, while almost 1:1 in black and 1:2 in other. Also because of the difference in ratio, the mother’s race might influence birth weight.
In the Hypertension Bar Plot, the ratio of low to not low is approximately 1:1 on the left and almost 1:5 on the right. History of hypertension also influences birth weight.
In the Uterine Irritability Bar Plot, there is still difference in the ratio. On the left bar, the ratio of low to not low is 1:1, while on the right, the ratio becomes almost 1:3. The presence of uterine irritability also influences birth weight.
Now we have the variables that affect birth weight, we might want to combine the variable that we have not used with the significant variable that we just discovered to see if there is a further relationship.
For example, here is a visualization of the association between mother’s age and birth weight depend on smoking status. In the plot, we can see that the association between age and birth weight is positive for nonsmokers, while being negative for smokers.

**Analysis**

We use linear regression to analyze the dataset, generating a function of birth weight explained by the other 8 variables in our dataset. Based on the analysis, we conclude that at 0.05 significant level, mother’s weight, race, smoking status during pregnancy, history of hypertension, and presence of uterine irritability have significant effects on the birth weight, while mother’s age, number of previous premature labours, and number of physician visits during the first trimester do not have significant effects on the weight of a newborn. Also, the analysis further shows that there is an interaction effect between the mother’s smoking status during the pregnancy and the mother’s age, meaning that the effect of mother’s smoking status on the weight of newborn will change based on the different age of mother. Following are our final model and 95% confidence intervals of coefficients of predictor variables base on our final model.

**Final model & 95% confidence intervals**

$$Birthweight = 2545 + 4*mother’s weight - 419*black - 318*other + 657*smoke - 599*hypertension -574*uterine irritability + 12*age - 43*smoke*age$$
